I'm hoping that there is nobody that
still does speculative design that's in
the chat that's watching us.
Is there anyone from out of interest,
if you're in the chat let me know.
And don't worry I'm not gonna
condemn you as a human being,
because I know that clients
do still ask for it.
Just to clarify what I mean
by speculative design,
speculative design is the practice
of producing unpaid design work.
For a prospective customer, or client
to prove your capability to deliver it.
And actually, it's really bad,
it's really bad for
everybody you do need to be avoiding it.
Is anybody willing to admit that
they do speculative design in chat?
>> The only note in there is never ask
the client what you were thinking.
>> [LAUGH] Yeah,
that is a very good comment.
So, let me explain why
speculative design is a problem,
first of all,
it costs everybody money, right.
>> This person said they did for
their first job.
>> Yeah, and it's understandable,
it's a thing that generally has
fallen out of favor in the industry.
But I just wanted to point out why
it was so fundamentally wrong, and
enable you to deal with clients
that still occasionally ask for it.
The first thing is it costs
everybody money, right.
Let's say you hired me or you wanted
to hire me to produce a design and so
did you, right.
Two of you both wanted to hire me.
Both of you asked me to do
speculative design, okay,
so I do speculative design for both of
you producing three designs for free.
Now you decide to hire me and
you decide not to, okay.
So where does the cost of your
speculative design goes, right,
you're not paying for it.
So am I paying for it?
Well, yeah, but if I'm paying for it,
I have to recover that cost, don't I,
cuz otherwise I go out of business, okay.
So who pays for it?
Hello, that will be you, right,
as the person that actually has hired me.
So asking for speculative design,
if you are serious about hiring
somebody is very dangerous.
Because you end up paying for every piece
of speculative design they've done before.
For other clients that haven't hired them,
so
it's really bad from
a money point of view.
Secondly, it's about selling and
not delivering, right.
So it doesn't matter if I'm
doing the right thing or
not, doesn't matter about
my design principles.
It doesn't matter about user testing, none
of that matters in speculative design.
All that matters is that you like it,
right, cuz I want you to hire me.
So I just designed for you, okay,
so what does that mean then.
So I've produced a completely
inappropriate design just to
make you like it.
And you said, I like that, I'll hire you.
So one of two things
happens at this point.
Either we go ahead with that horrendous
design that's totally inappropriate, and
you don't get what you
need out of the project.
Or alternatively,
we throw it away, all right, and
start again in which case you're now
paying for two lots of design work, okay.
And in addition it's uninformed, right.
When I'm doing a piece of speculative
design I know that nothing about
the users, nothing about the company.
All I know is what you like and
what you don't like, and
even that I've got to guess that
from asking a few questions.
And it's certainly not collaborative in
any way, it's not involving the client.
So anyway, that was just a little bit of
an aside that I wanted to touch on before
we got too much further.
Yeah, what's being said in chat.
>> This person said, Ben said,
you have to do it often would love
to know how to get out of that loop.
>> Yeah, basically it's
having the bravery to say no.
And then to be able to back that up
with what I've literally just shared,
all right.
So then,
basically take this slide deck afterwards,
go through these points
on the screen right now.
Cuz if you talk the client
through each of those things, and
also I suspect, I'm pretty sure if
you go to my website and google.
Can't google on someone else's website,
we can actually my search is
driven by Google, but anyway.
Go to my website and
search on speculative design, and
you'll get an article that comes up and
talks you through this logic.
And you basically say, look,
we don't do speculative design
because we believe that it is bad for
our clients, right.
And then you explain why you
believe it's bad for your clients.
You don't say it's bad for me as an agency
or a freelancer, cuz they don't care.
But you do need to explain
why it's bad for them.
Now that feels like quite
a brave thing to do.
But I promise you,
at least in my experience,
I win more work because
I'm willing to challenge
the client, and explain my logic.
Than I do if I just roll over and
do what they want, but
even more significantly, it shifts
the relationship with the client.
So instead of you being a servant,
down in abbey under the stairs
yes sir no sir kind of person.
You become the peer that works
with them to find a solution.
So are you'll be willing to
challenge a client and say, no,
I'm not gonna do this, it's very good.
And then there's a final reason why
it's really good to do this, and
have the bravery to do this.
Which is if you get heavy pushback
from the client, and the client says,
no, we want speculative design,
that is a serious red flag.
Because what it shows is they're not
willing to listen to your opinion, and
that they're stuck in their own process,
in their own mindset.
And you will almost certainly
lose money on that project, so
that's my thoughts on speculative design